---
eventdate: '2010-02-17'
quarter: Winter 2010
title: Forecasting with Imprecise Probabilities [IP] – some preliminary findings
speakers:
- name: Teddy Seidenfeld
  title: Philosophy and Statistics, Carnegie Mellon University
  homepage: http://www.hss.cmu.edu/philosophy/faculty-seidenfeld.php
---
De Finetti’s theory of coherent 2-sided previsions serves as the basis for numerous Imprecise Probability [IP] generalizations.  In its original form, de Finetti’s 2-person, zero-sum prevision-game begins with a class of bounded random variables, measurable with respect to a common state-space. One player, the bookie, is required for each variableX in the class to post a “fair” (i.e., 2-sided) price, P[X] – a price at which he/she is willing either to buy or to sell units of X.  The bookie’s opponent, the gambler, then chooses finitely many of these variables and contract to buy/sell them with the bookie at the bookie’s fair prices.  De Finetti calls these fair prices the bookie’s previsions for the variables. 

The bookie’s previsions are incoherent if the gambler has a buy/sell strategy that insures a uniformly negative net payoff for the bookie (and then a sure gain for the gambler), regardless which state obtains.  Otherwise, the bookie’s previsions are coherent.  De Finetti’s Fundamental Theorem of Previsions insures that a bookie’s previsions are coherent if and only if there exists a finitely additive probability P that determines the fair prices for each variable in the class.  The prevision P[X ] is the expected value of X under the probability distribution P.  

One, well-studied approach to an IP-theory is to modify de Finetti’s game.  For each variable X the bookie fixes a pair of 1-sided previsions, rather than a single 2-sided prevision.  For each X, the bookie announces a lower prevision to be used as a buying price, and a (possibly) different upper prevision to be used as a selling price.  A modified IP-Fundamental Theorem obtains: A bookie’s 1-sided previsions are coherent if and only if there is a maximal, non-empty (convex) set of finitely additive probabilities P, where the lower prevision for X is the infemum of expectations for X over the set P, and the upper prevision for X is the supremum of expectations for X over the set P. 

De Finetti was concerned with strategic aspects of his prevision game.  A bookie might take advantage of knowledge about who the gambler is to announce previsions different from her/his own degrees of belief.  For instance, though the bookie’s fair price for the (indicator function G of the) event G is .50, but being confident that the gambler’s fair price for G is .75, the bookie might announce a prevision P[G] = .70, anticipating that the gambler will find it profitable to buy units of Gfrom him/her at this inflated price.  

In order to mitigate such strategic aspects of his prevision-game, de Finetti used probabilistic forecasting subject to Brier score as an alternative framework for introducing a second but equivalent criterion of coherence.  Consider probabilistic forecasting of events.  Then, each random variable is an indicator function for an event.  The bookie’s previsions now are probabilistic forecasts subject to Brier score: squared-error loss.  The penalty for a forecast P[G] when event G obtains is (1-P[G])2 and the loss is (P[G])2when the event G fails to obtain. The score from a finite set of forecasts is the sum of the separate forecasts.  A set of forecasts is coherent in de Finetti’s second sense if and only if there is no rival set of forecasts whose Brier scores uniformly dominate in all states.  De Finetti established equivalence between these two senses of coherence.  The second sense of coherence, operationalized with Brier score, does not involve strategic forecasting, in contrast with the opportunity for strategic action in the 2-person previsions-game. 

In ongoing work, we investigate a modification of de Finetti’s second criterion so that it serves as a basis for IP theory.  Analogous to the use of 1-sided previsions, we distinguish a lower forecast, used to assess the penalty score when the event fails, from an upper forecast, used to assess the penalty score when the event obtains.  The issues we address with this generalization go beyond de Finetti’s motivation to use the second criterion of coherence in order to avoid the threat of strategic behavior.