---
eventdate: '2011-05-11'
quarter: Spring 2011
title: 'Anchoring Effects in Judgments of Worst-case Scenario Weather Forecasts: A
  Multi-Level Analysis'
speakers:
- name: Sonia Savelli
  title: Psychology, University of Washington
  homepage: http://www.apl.washington.edu/people/profile.php?last_name=Savelli&first_name=Sonia
---
Many weather forecast providers believe that forecast uncertainty in the form of the worst- case scenario would be useful for general public end users. We tested this suggestion in a study using realistic weather-related decision tasks involving low temperatures. undergraduates made 120 successive forecast decisions concerning whether to apply a road treatment to prevent icy driving conditions. In this task, the worst-case scenario was the lower bound of the 80% predictive interval for temperature. A multi-level analysis was conducted to identify the influence of the worst-case scenario on temperature estimates. Participants, given the statistical equivalent of the worst-case scenario, demonstrated biased understanding of future weather conditions due to anchoring, compared to those given both boundaries or no uncertainty information. We argue that this was due to an anchoring effect on numeric estimates, which were closer to the worst-case scenario than was warranted and increased linearly as the anchor became more extreme. In addition, participants systematically “corrected” the forecast they were given, presumably based on prior experience. This effect was most prominent in the condition in which no uncertainty was provided, suggesting that people feel compelled to take uncertainty into account, even when it is not acknowledged by the forecast. In addition, we showed that both the anchoring and correction biases were least evident when both bounds were provided, suggesting that balanced uncertainty leads to the best understanding of future weather conditions. These results suggest that worst-case scenario forecasts can mislead the user. They appear to convince people that temperatures will be lower than what is indicated by the forecast.