---
eventdate: '2012-04-25'
quarter: Spring 2012
title: Marginal models of social mobility
speakers:
- name: Tamas Rudas
  title: AFFILIATE PROF, Statistics, Eotvos Lorand University
  homepage: http://statisztika.tatk.elte.hu/tanszeki_honlap/Rudas_Tamas.htm
---
The talk uses the marginal modeling approach to graphical models to define path models for categorical data. Advantages of this approach include the applicability of standard procedures to test model fit and the availability of a complete parameterization of the joint distributions under the model. The marginal log-linear parameters involved measure the strengths of all relevant effects. This approach is in sharp contrast with estimating and interpreting ad hoc parameters, without paying attention to overall model fit and to other effects which also influence the joint distribution of the variables.

The method is applied to the social status attainment process, that is to the analysis of effects influencing the social status an individual achieves. Two examples are presented. One compares the status attainment processes in the USA, Hungary and Czechoslovakia at the end of the last century, and shows that policies in the former socialist countries to prevent status inheritance had no success. The other example compares groups of countries with conservative and liberal welfare systems and reveals the differences in the effects of the fathers' positions on their sons' positions.

The talk is joint work with Renáta Németh.