---
eventdate: '2012-11-28'
quarter: Fall 2012
title: Identifiability and Estimation of Causal Effects of a New Treatment on Patient’s
  Outcomes Truncated by Deaths
speakers:
- name: Xiao-Hua Andrew Zhou
  title: Professor, Biostatistics, University of Washington
  homepage: http://faculty.washington.edu/azhou/
---
In comparative effectiveness studies, we are interested in estimating the causal effect of a new treatment relative to a standard one on patient’s outcomes, such as the health related quality of life (HRQOL), after a certain time period of taking the treatment.  In these studies,  some patients may die before their outcomes can be measured, and hence, their  measures are not well defined.

For example, in a randomized trial comparing a new drug with a traditional drug,  we  are interested in estimating the causal effect of the new drug relative to  the old drug on the health related quality of life (HRQOL) after a certain time period of taking the treatment.   But some of the patients in the study may die before their outcomes are measured. One main issue with estimation of such the causal effect is parameter identifiability.   We first show that the causal effect of interest is not identifiable non-parametrically under the commonly made regularity conditions in the causal inference literature. We then introduce a concept of using one additional baseline covariate associated with principal strata to make the causal effect identifiable. After we derive the sufficient conditions for identifiability of the causal effect, we then propose a non-parametric method for estimating the causal effect of interest. Our simulation studies show the proposed estimation methods work well in finite-sample sizes.  Finally, we apply our approach to a data set from Southwest Oncology Group (SWOG) clinical trial on the effectiveness of the treatment of docetaxel and estramustine (DE) with mitoxantrone and prednisone (MP) in patients with metastatic, androgen-independent prostate cancer.  This is a joint with Peng Din, Zhi Geng, and Wei Yan.