---
eventdate: '2012-10-17'
quarter: Fall 2012
title: 'Obesity and U.S. Adult Mortality: A Bigger Picture of the Growing Threat'
speakers:
- name: Ryan K. Masters
  title: Sociology, Columbia University
  homepage: http://sociology.colorado.edu/people/Masters-Ryan
---
Background: The public health importance of the U.S. obesity epidemic has been questioned by studies that have sought to link obesity with mortality. But properly estimating such a link requires careful consideration of age variation in obesity’s effect on mortality risk, as well as cohort variation in obesity prevalence. I estimate the percent of deaths for black and white men and women in the U.S. population between 1986 and 2006 that were associated with overweight (body mass index [BMI] 25.0 to &lt; 30.0), grade 1 obesity (BMI 30.0 to &lt; 35.0), and grade 2/3 obesity (BMI ≥ 35.0) by examining the combined effects of age variation in the obesity-mortality relationship and cohort variation in age-specific obesity prevalence.

Methods: Nineteen cross-sectional, nationally representative waves of the National Health Interview Survey (1986-2004) were linked to individual mortality records at the National Death Index (NDI) through 2006, and examined for age and cohort patterns in obesity’s effect on U.S. mortality. Age, period, and cohort patterns of obesity prevalence were estimated using hierarchical age-period-cohort (HAPC) cross classified random effects models (CCREM), and age patterns of the obesity-mortality association were estimated using Cox and Royston-Parmar survival models. Population Attributable Fractions (PAF) of overweight and obese body-mass as a cause of U.S. mortality between ages 40 and 84 during the time period 1986-2006 were estimated by combining the age-specific effect of overweight and obesity on mortality risk with cohorts’ age-specific overweight and obesity prevalence rates.

Findings: The percent of U.S. adult deaths between 1986 and 2006 associated with overweight and obesity was 5.4 and 15.9 percent for black and white men, respectively, and 27.8 and 22.5 percent for black and white women, respectively. Key findings were significantly stronger associations between obesity and mortality at older ages, and higher percentages of mortality attributable to elevated BMI among younger birth cohorts.

Interpretation: Previous research that did not properly account for age variation in obesity’s effect on mortality and/or cohort variation in the prevalence of obesity have underestimated the impact of the obesity epidemic on U.S. mortality. Methods that appropriately account for these factors estimate obesity to play a much larger role, placing it at the forefront of concern for public health action.