---
eventdate: '2012-10-03'
quarter: Fall 2012
title: 'Cognitive Development Through Adulthood: The Seattle Longitudinal Study'
speakers:
- name: K. Warner Schaie
  title: University of Washington
  homepage: http://www.hhdev.psu.edu/hdfs/faculty-staff/schaie
- name: Sherry L. Willis
  title: University of Washington
  homepage: http://www.hhdev.psu.edu/hdfs/faculty-staff/willis
---
This presentation will describe the design of the Seattle Longitudinal Study (SLS) and key study findings regarding developmental change in psychological functioning across the adult life course.

Dr. K. Warner Schaie began the Seattle Longitudinal Study (SLS) in 1956 in cooperation with the Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound (GHC). Dr. Sherry L. Willis became principal co-investigator of the study in 1983. The study involves a cohort-sequential design in which multiple birth cohorts have been studied longitudinally over the same developmental period in each cohort’s life course, permitting examination of cohort differences in longitudinal change. The study involves seven-year waves, since 1956: 1963, 1970, 1977, 1984, 1991, 1998, and 2005. At each interval, all persons who had previously participated in the study were asked to participate again. In addition at each seven-year interval, a new group of people randomly selected from the Group Health membership have been asked to participate. Approximately 6000 people have now participated at some time in this study.

The cognitive ability battery was expanded in 1984 to include multiple measures of the latent constructs of inductive reasoning, spatial orientation, numerical ability, perceptual speed, verbal comprehension, and verbal memory. We have also added measures of personality, micro-environmental dimensions, abstracts of health records, and measures of health behaviors. Since 1997, we have also  \collected biomarkers such as E4 genotypes, for a sub-sample, both structural and functional neuro-imaging measures.