---
eventdate: '2013-10-09'
quarter: Fall 2013
title: "The Arab Spring and MENA's Historical Development: Oil Curse or Monarchical\
  \ Exceptionalism?"
speakers:
- name: Victor Menaldo
  title: Assistant Professor, Political Science, University of Washington
  homepage: http://faculty.washington.edu/vmenaldo/
---
This paper helps gain purchase on the political instability that buffeted the MENA during the Arab Spring. The region's monarchies have largely elided turmoil and violence. The &quot;republics&quot; have not. This paper shows that this has also been the case historically. Furthermore, the association between political stability and monarchy is not driven by oil wealth; nor does oil explain why monarchies have higher quality institutions, provide more public goods, and have higher levels of educational attainment and faster economic growth. To help understand why there is a correlation between monarchy and these outcomes in the MENA, this paper introduces a theory about how an invented, yet historically rooted, political culture can solve a ruler's credible commitment problem. By securing elites' rights and interests, it bolsters their support of the regime. This paper also illustrates the evolution of monarchic political cultures over the history of the MENA. We document the geographic and biogeographic underpinnings of monarchy, arguing that extreme aridity and pastoral nomadism centered on camel herding sustained a tribal social structure. This unique equilibrium held despite millennia of imperialism, the spread of Islam, and European colonialism. A case study of Qatar’s history also corroborates this theory.