---
eventdate: '2013-05-29'
quarter: Spring 2013
title: Bayesian Forecasting of Cohort Fertility
speakers:
- name: Emilio Zagheni
  title: ASST PROFESSOR, Sociology, Queens College - CUNY
  homepage: http://www.zagheni.net
---
There are signs that fertility in rich countries may have stopped declining, but this depends critically on whether women currently in reproductive ages are postponing or reducing lifetime fertility. Analysis of average completed family sizes requires forecasts of remaining fertility for women born 1970-1995. We propose a Bayesian model for fertility that incorporates a priori information about patterns over age and time. We use data for 35 countries to construct improper priors that give high weight to historically plausible rate surfaces. In the age dimension, cohort schedules should be well approximated by principal components of historical schedules. In the time dimension, series should be smooth and approximately linear over short spans. We calibrate priors so that approximation residuals have theoretical distributions similar to historical data. Our priors use quadratic penalties and imply a high-dimensional normal posterior distribution for each country’s fertility surface. Forecasts for cohorts currently 15-44 show consistent patterns. In the US, Northern Europe, and Western Europe, slight rebounds in completed fertility are likely. In East Asia and Central and Southern Europe there is little evidence for a rebound. Our methods could be applied to other forecasting and missing-data problems with only minor modifications.