---
eventdate: '2014-10-01'
quarter: Fall 2014
title: Analyzing observational studies like randomized trials, and vice versa
speakers:
- name: Miguel Hernan
  title: Epidemiology, Harvard University
  homepage: http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/miguel-hernan/
---
Randomized trials and observational studies are often used to answer the same causal questions in comparative effectiveness and safety research (CER). For example, the effects of statins and of postmenopausal hormone therapy on the risk of coronary heart disease have been estimated both using randomized clinical trials and observational studies. Randomized trials have traditionally been considered as the “gold standard” for clinical research. In CER, however, randomized trials are often not ideal. The typically long duration and pragmatic approach of post-approval CER trials may result in substantial noncompliance and loss to follow-up that render intention-to-treat estimates effectively useless. Because treatment choices and participation decisions after baseline are not randomized in neither randomized trials nor observational follow-up studies, time-varying confounding and selection bias may arise under both designs. As a result, CER trials may resemble more an observational study with baseline randomization than a classic pre-approval randomized clinical trial. Under this conceptualization of CER trials as follow-up studies with baseline randomization, the analysis of observational studies and randomized trials should be identical (except for baseline confounding adjustment), which is contrary to common practice. This talk reviews a common framework for the analysis of CER randomized trials and observational studies, and presents several applications for cardiovascular, renal, and infectious diseases.
