---
eventdate: '2016-04-13'
quarter: Spring 2016
title: Search Personalization using Machine Learning
speakers:
- name: Hema Yoganarasimhan
  title: 'Assistant Professor of Marketing, Marketing and International Business, '
  homepage:
---
Query-based search is commonly used by many businesses to help consumers find
information/products on their websites. Examples include search engines (Google,
Bing), online retailers (Amazon, Macy’s), and entertainment sites (Hulu, YouTube).
Nevertheless, a significant portion of search sessions are unsuccessful, i.e., do not provide
information that the user was looking for. We present a machine learning framework that
improves the quality of search results through automated personalization based on a user’s
search history. Our framework consists of three modules – (a) Feature generation, (b)
NDCG-based LambdaMART algorithm, and (c) Feature selection wrapper. We estimate
our framework on large-scale data from a leading search engine using Amazon EC2
servers. We show that our framework offers a significant improvement in search quality
compared to non-personalized results. We also show that the returns to personalization
are monotonically, but concavely increasing with the length of user history. Next, we
find that personalization based on short-term history or “within-session” behavior is less
valuable than long-term or “across-session” personalization. We also derive the value of
different feature sets – user-specific features contribute over 50% of the improvement
and click-specific over 28%. Finally, we demonstrate scalability to big data and derive
the set of optimal features that maximize accuracy while minimizing computing speed.